# CraterFinancials.com - Test Automation Framework - UI & API
Sample end to end test automation framework for UI and API testing

This sample Software Test Automation Framework is built as a Maven Project using BDD (Behavior Driven Development) principles with Cucumber and Junit in Java. Page Object Model structure is also utilized to maximize the framework re-usability and maintainability.

And the UI test scenarios are written in Gherkin language that could benefit connecting the team.

And also this framework is structured to support API test automation using RestAssured library.

## Project Structure
 
 src/test/java
 - api_tests - where API tests reside (API tests written using RestAssured library in TestNG test structure)
 
 - pages - Pages objects are collected/created and defined in this folder
 - runners - one or more test runner classes are created within this folder
 - step_definitions - Test step implementation for the cucumber scenarion steps defined in this folder
 - utils - Any utility and support classes and functions for testing activities are in this folder
 
 src/test/resources
 - features - Cucumber feature files are created in this folder to define the user scenarios for the app features
 - test_files - Any test data files that are used for testing purposes are stored in this folder
 - testdata - Any  test data or properties files are stored in this folder
 
Cucumber_reports - Cucumber report files generated by the cucumber are stored in this folder
 
pom.xml - pom.xml if used to define the project configurations, libraries/content/dependencies management and build/execution configurations.
 
## Tools used

 Maven - is used to define the project configurations, libraries/content/dependencies management and buil/execution configurations, and used for both UI and API framework.
 
 UI - tools used for UI test automation:
 
  - Cucumber - is used to define feature scenarios in gherkin, and also to create test suites and execution flow by cucumber tagging mechanism, as well as reporting.
  - Junit - is used to run the cucumber scenarios with cucumber options, and also used for assertion.
  - Selenium WebDriver 4 - is used to automate web applications by implementing the cucumber step definitions, and managing the page objects. 
  - Faker - is used to provide fake test data for the tests.
  
  API - tools for API test automation:
  
  - TestNG - is used to create and manage the API test cases, test suites and test executions flow and Assertion, and reporting.
  - RestAssured - is used to define the API test in a very simple and readable manner.
  - Faker - is used to provide fake test for the tests
  
  Other tools used to achieve end to end testing flow:
  
  - GIT - is used to manage source code and version control.
  - GitHub - is used as a remote source code management platform and version control tool.
  - Jenkins - is CI/CD tool which we have used to run the test suites remotely, by either on-demand basis, or periodic schedule basis.
  - Eclipse - IDE for the project development.
  
  
  
## Creating tests

##### Creating UI tests: [Cucumber reference documentation](https://cucumber.io/docs/cucumber/api/?lang=java#running-cucumber)
 
 1. Create a feature file in `features` folder under `src/test/resources` folder with the extension as `.feature` 
 2. Define user scenarios with cucumber key words such as Given, When, And and Then structure
 3. Generate step definition code snippet using cucumber `dryRun`
 4. Create a step definition class under `tests or step_definitions` folder and put those generated steps snippet 
 5. Create page classes (if necessary) under `pages` folder and collect/define the page objects (`web elements`)
 6. Implement the step definitions based on the scenario behavior
  
#### Running the UI tests
 1. Create a TestRunner class under `runners` folder
 2. Define the RunWith cucumber options with necessary options like: feature files location, and glue...
 3. Pass a scenario tag to execute tests locally using cucumber tags, and run as JUnit test
 4. To run the tests remotely via a CI/CD tools like `Jenkins`, a `maven build action` has to be defined with `SureFire` plugin which points to execute the cucumber runner class in `pom.xml`
 5. On Jenkins job under build workflow,  select the `top level maven targets` from `Build Steps` action and pass the following command:
 
 ```bash
 clean test -Dcucumber.filter.tags="@Regression" 
 ```
  
##### Creating API tests: [RestAssured Documantation](https://rest-assured.io/)
 1. Create a class in `api_tests` folder under `src/test/java` folder
 2. Create TestNG test/tests to define the API test cases with RestAssured library. (refer to the existing API tests in folder)
 
##### Running the API tests
 1. Locally, run a particular API test as a TestNG test, or run a suite of API tests as a TestNG suite via `testng.xml` file
 2. To run the API test remotely via CI/CD tools like Jenkins, create a TestNG xml file, define a TestNG suite that includes one or more API classes to execute.
 3. In the pom.xml file, create a Maven profile that includes the TestNG xml file
 4. On Jenkins job under Build WorkFLow, select the top level Maven targets from `Build Steps`action, asnd pass the following command:
 
 ```bash
 clean test -P<Profile_id>
 ```
 Profile example script:
 
 ```	<profiles>
		<profile>
			<id>api_tests</id>
			<build>
				<plugins>
					<plugin>
						<groupId>org.apache.maven.plugins</groupId>
						<artifactId>maven-surefire-plugin</artifactId>
						<version>3.0.0-M5</version>
						<configuration>
							<suiteXmlFiles>
								<suiteXmlFile>testng.xml</suiteXmlFile>
							</suiteXmlFiles>
						</configuration>
					</plugin>
				</plugins>
			</build>
		</profile>
	</profiles>
 ```
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   







